Hezbollah pager explosions: How could Israel have triggered the deadly blasts?
Lebanese military sources have blamed Israel but there has been no official word
By Perkin Amalaraj and Elena Salvoni and Wiliam Hunter

Published: 16:19 BST, 17 September 2024 | Updated: 04:50 BST, 18 September 2024

e-mail
173
shares
1.2k

View comments  e-mail
Top
+99Home
1.2k

View comments
Nine people, including two young girls, were killed and 2,8000 were maimed across Lebanon today, after hundreds of pagers used by Hezbollah fighters simultaneously exploded across the country. 

The wave of sudden and unexpected detonations, which began around 3.45pm local time (1345 GMT) and lasted roughly an hour, gave way to widespread panic and chaotic scenes across Beirut’s southern suburbs, the Bekaa Valley and southern Lebanon. 

Iran-backed Hezbollah had been using pagers instead of mobile phones because the latter can be tracked and used to pinpoint deadly missile strikes on its commanders. 

David Kennedy, a former US National Security Agency intelligence analyst, told CNN:  'It’s more likely that Israel had human operatives… in Hezbollah… The pagers would have been implanted with explosives and likely only to detonate when a certain message was received. 


+
7
View gallery
The remnants of what is believed to be a pager carried by a Lebanese militant that detonated earlier today
+
7
View gallery
The remnants of what is believed to be a pager carried by a Lebanese militant that detonated earlier today

Pagers used by Hezbollah members for vital communications exploded this afternoon, injuring hundreds
+
7
View gallery
Pagers used by Hezbollah members for vital communications exploded this afternoon, injuring hundreds

TRENDING

Scientists investigating Titan sub reveal explosive new details
92.3k viewing now

What heaven's really like - by brain surgeon who went there
220.6k viewing now

Antarctica's 'Doomsday Glacier' is on verge of COLLAPSING, study warns
28.2k viewing now
'The complexity needed to pull this off is incredible. It would have required many different intelligence components and execution. 

'Human intelligence (HUMINT) would be the main method used to pull this off, along with intercepting the supply chain in order to make modifications to the pagers.'

No one has yet claimed responsibility for the mass incident, though Hezbollah and Lebanon's government has pointed the finger at Israel, which hasn't yet commented. 

There are currently two main theories as to how the detonations happened.

One suggests that the pagers were filled with explosives, and set off by remote access and the other theory proposes a cybersecurity breach caused the pagers' lithium ion batteries to overheat and explode.

A source close to Hezbollah claimed that the incident came as a direct result of an 'Israeli breach' of its communications, though this has not been confirmed.

A different official said that the cause of the explosions was likely the lithium batteries that power the pagers.

While lithium-ion batteries are commonly used in consumer electronics, they can overheat and catch on fire - even exploding violently in some cases. 

This is due to a phenomenon called thermal runaway, a chemical chain reaction which occurs when the battery experiences a rapid temperature change, which is triggered when the battery is overheated, punctured or overcharged.

As this chemical reaction progresses it can lead to a sudden release of energy which can cause devices to explode with intense force and heat.
